Project and SIG Proposal: Resources and Entities (#1976)
open-telemetry/community: projects/resources-and-entities.md

# Resources and Entities

## Description

> OpenTelemetry's usage of Resource has a number of known problems (see listed below). The Project's and the SIG's charter is to solve these and other related problems. 

Author: Fixed.

> The background work on these problems and coming up with potential solution options has been in progress for more than a year now, with participation of the listed sponsors and other interested contributors. We have been waiting until there is sufficient understanding of what and how we would like to solve these problems and also until we are certain there is significant available contributing capacity and interest.

Author: Fixed.

> We believe we arrived at that point and now is the time to start this project.

Author: Fixed.

### Problem 1: Commingling of Entities

> The Resource [is defined as](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/sdk.md) a "representation of the entity producing telemetry". Note that the spec speaks about one particular producing entity. In practice we commingle multiple entities into one Resource. The spec then shows a clear example that talks about multiple entities (Process, Container, Pod, etc) in one Resource:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Resource [is defined as](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/sdk.md) a "representation of the entity producing telemetry". Note that the spec speaks about one particular producing entity. In practice we commingle multiple entities into one Resource. The spec then shows a clear example that talks about multiple entities (Process, Container, Pod, etc) in one Resource:
```

Author: Fixed.

### Problem 2: Lack of Precise Identity

The Resource is one set of attributes, which contains all attributes of all entities that the Resource represents. It is impossible to tell which of these attributes identify the entity (or entities) and which are non-identifying, i.e. purely descriptive.

This lack of precise identity makes it difficult or impossible to identify the same entities reported in different Resources. 

### Problem 3: Lack of Mutable Attributes

Resource is defined to be immutable in the OpenTelemetry SDK. This does not align well with the fact that non-identifying attributes of entities may change over time. For example OpenTelemetry Collector collects data about Pods and adds Pod labels as Resource attributes. Pod labels are mutable in Kubernetes and can change over time, while the Pod's identity remains immutable. Here is another example where [mutable Service attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/3401#issuecomment-1511770735) are desirable.

With the current definition of the Resource we are forced to either leave out any attributes that may ever change over time or violate the spec definition.

> Additionally, OpenTelemetry currently lacks the ability to provide resource attributes that require some kind of delayed lookup that may fail (see this issue). This required, e.g. passing environment variables for k8s container name and various downward-api values for an OpenTelemetry SDK to appropriately report this resource.

Reviewer 2: missing link?

Author: Added.

> Additionally, OpenTelemetry currently lacks the ability to provide resource attributes that require some kind of delayed lookup that may fail (see [this issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1298)). This required, e.g. passing environment variables for k8s container name and various downward-api values for an OpenTelemetry SDK to appropriately report this resource.

Author: @jsuereth can you help clarify this?

> Additionally, OpenTelemetry currently lacks the ability to provide resource attributes that require some kind of delayed lookup that may fail (see [this issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1298)). This required, e.g. passing environment variables for k8s container name and various downward-api values for an OpenTelemetry SDK to appropriately report this resource.

Reviewer 3: Rewritten, PTAL.

> Additionally, OpenTelemetry currently lacks the ability to provide resource attributes that require some kind of delayed lookup that may fail (see [this issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1298)). This required, e.g. passing environment variables for k8s container name and various downward-api values for an OpenTelemetry SDK to appropriately report this resource.

Reviewer 4: LGTM @jsuereth.

In reality OpenTelemetry SDKs can also easily violate the definition as soon as we consider mutability from recipients perspective. SDKs only guarantee immutability during a single process session. As soon as the process is restarted and the SDK is newly initialized there is no guarantee that the Resource will have the same set of attributes (e.g. because process.id can be one of the Resource attributes).
It is clear that the strictly "immutable" definition of the Resource is not sufficient for what we are trying to model.

### Problem 4: Metric Cardinality Problem

> Today every attribute in an OpenTelemetry Resource, according to the metric data model, is used to determine the identity of metric.  Given known issues in metric time-series database implementation around cardinality, this can cause major issues if Resources are allowed to leverage high cardinality attributes. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Today every attribute in an OpenTelemetry Resource, according to the metric data model, is used to determine the identity of a metric.  Given known issues in metric time-series database implementations around cardinality, this can cause major issues if Resources are allowed to leverage high cardinality attributes. 
```

> Today every attribute in an OpenTelemetry Resource, according to the metric data model, is used to determine the identity of a metric.  Given known issues in metric time-series database implementations around cardinality, this can cause major issues if Resources are allowed to leverage high cardinality attributes. 

Reviewer 4: Is it really true that every resource attribute is supposed to determine its identity? In OTLP, the `service.name`, `service.namespace`, and `service.instance.id` triplet is [required to be unique](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics/#resource-attributes-1), and is used to identify the resource when constructing `target_info` in Prometheus.

Author: >Is it really true that every resource attribute is supposed to determine the resource's identity?

Yes, metric objects are identified by several pieces of data, including Resource attributes, [see here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/data-model.md#opentelemetry-protocol-data-model).

Quote from the spec:

>Metric streams are grouped into individual Metric objects, identified by:
> - The originating Resource attributes
> - ...

Author: >In OTLP, the service.name, service.namespace, and service.instance.id triplet is [required to be unique](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics/#resource-attributes-1), and is used to identify the resource when constructing target_info in Prometheus (becoming the identifying job and instance labels).

That is not required in OTLP, the Prometheus compatibility doc is wrong. The uniqueness of the triplet is merely a semantic convention for Services. Not every Resource is a Service in OpenTelemetry.

Author: Filed this to fix the Prometheus compatibility doc: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/3944

Reviewer 4: OK, thanks for clarifying that!

> Today every attribute in an OpenTelemetry Resource, according to the metric data model, is used to determine the identity of a metric.  Given known issues in metric time-series database implementations around cardinality, this can cause major issues if Resources are allowed to leverage high cardinality attributes. 

Author: Fixed.

> Given many Resource attributes semantic conventions today were defined for the tracing instrumentation, we do find many high cardinality definitions, e.g. the [Process](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/resource/process.md#process) resource includes `pid` and and `parent_pid`, which are known to churn between instances of an application and would lead to higher cardinality streams. 

Author: Fixed.

> Many metric backends are simply erasing resource attributes from metrics to workaround the issue.  Here's an example [solution for prometheus](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1782), and [another proposal for yet another point-fix for prometheus](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2736).

Reviewer 3: This was written a while ago but it still accurate.  

*YES* OpenTelemetry does write `target_info` metric.  However it is hard for prometheus users to deal with, forcing awkward joins.

I think prometheus itself is looking to solve that problem, but we still need (in OTEL) to divide descriptive attributes (for target_info) from identifying attributes (in prometheus, these are  job/instance labels).

> Many metric backends are simply erasing resource attributes from metrics to workaround the issue.  Here's an example [solution for prometheus](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1782), and [another proposal for yet another point-fix for prometheus](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2736).

Reviewer 4: @jsuereth yes, we are working on making it easier to include descriptive (non-identifying) resource attributes in Prometheus queries, by introducing the so-called `info` function, and by annotating in TSDB which are the identifying labels of info metrics (including `target_info`). This should be a lot easier to use than having to join on `target_info`.

> Many metric backends are simply erasing resource attributes from metrics to workaround the issue.  Here's an example [solution for prometheus](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1782), and [another proposal for yet another point-fix for prometheus](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2736).

Reviewer 3: So this comment about metric backends is about *exporters in otel* and isn't specifically about prometheus.

Given your response I think you understand the nuance here and how we'd like to split "identity" from "description".  If prometheus adds info labels, this is even more incentive for us to be able to split Otel Resource into "identity" and "description".

Going to mark this as resolved, but please reopend if something is still unclear.

> However, these workarounds prevent Metrics users from regaining descriptive attributes (and benefits) of current Otel Resource detection.

Reviewer 3: First - not every metric backend is prometheus.  This problem affects any time series database, even if we have a "workaround" for prometheus.

Second - within prometheus the ability to restore via job/instance join is considered onerous and recommended against:   See [Point #2 in this blog post](https://grafana.com/blog/2023/07/20/a-practical-guide-to-data-collection-with-opentelemetry-and-prometheus/).  I wouldn't say what we have is a solution, more a workaround.  SPecifically, it gets really awkward to write some queries.  E.g. try to render histogram pecentiles w/ target_info joins.  That's PromQL the average users doesn't want to see.

While I think prometheus is investigating ways to solve/improve this issue, OpenTelemetry cleaning up its data model should also help here.

### Go SDK Prototype:

See https://github.com/tigrannajaryan/opentelemetry-go/pull/244

### Collector Prototype

See https://github.com/tigrannajaryan/opentelemetry-collector/pull/4

### Collector Contrib Prototype

See https://github.com/tigrannajaryan/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/1/files

### OTLP Protocol Buffer changes

See: https://github.com/tigrannajaryan/opentelemetry-proto/pull/2/files

## Staffing / Help Wanted

The project has 2 TC sponsors: Tigran Najaryan and Josh Suereth. The sponsors will also actively lead and contribute to the project. We are looking for other contributors that have expertise and interest in the project.

## Required staffing

Project leads and TC sponsors: Tigran Najaryan and Josh Suereth

Engineers willing to write prototypes and contribute:

- Go - Tigran Najaryan, Tyler Yahn (maintainer)
- Java - Josh Suereth, Jack Berg (maintainer)
- Rust - Josh Suereth
- Collector - Tigran Najaryan, Bogdan Drutu (maintainer), Dmitrii Anoshin (maintainer).

## Meeting Times
Once a project is started, the working group should meet regularly for discussion. These meeting times should be posted on the OpenTelemetry public calendar.

## Timeline

> We expect the SIG to start working immediately. The timeline for specific milestones and deliverables is to be defined by the SIG.

Reviewer 6: Can the project leads please start with a deadline for delivering the initial design proposal?

Author: Added.
